User-facing changelog for 4.4 (#17368)
jupyterlab/jupyterlab: CHANGELOG.md

Settings can now be exported to `overrides.json` from the Settings Editor,
which can be used to pre-configure defaults on deployments or for restoring
the settings.

### Workspace indicator

An opt-in workspace indicator displayed on the top bar (next to the menu bar) can be enabled
in the Settings → View → Appearance → Show Workspace Indicator.

### Support for collaboration without `RTC:` drive

Real time collaboration in previous versions of JupyterLab
(which can be enabled by installing jupyter-collaboration package)
was implemented by swapping the default JupyterLab file system
drive to a collaborative drive with the `RTC:` prefix.
This was not compatible with multiple extensions.
JupyterLab 4.4 introduces Content Providers API which will
enable the next version of `jupyter-collaboration` to work
without changing the drive prefix, and thus improves
compatibility with extensions which do not support arbitrary drives.

### Kernel subshells support

TODO

### Context menu opt-out

The context menu, available under right mouse click in browsers, can now be disabled globally
by toggling the `Enable Context Menu` option available in the Command Palette,

> r via JSON Settings Editor in the Application Context Menu.

Author: ```suggestion
or via JSON Settings Editor in the Application Context Menu.
```

JupyterLab 4.4 introduces Content Providers API which will
enable the next version of `jupyter-collaboration` to work
without changing the drive prefix, and thus improves
compatibility with extensions which do not support arbitrary drives.

### Kernel subshells support

Kernel subshells, introduced in [JEP 91](https://jupyter.org/enhancement-proposals/91-kernel-subshells/kernel-subshells.html),
enable concurrent code execution, in kernels which support them.
When performing a long-running computation (such as training of a model), subshells enable:
- using `ipywidgets` with updates displayed immediately,
- monitoring the kernel resource usage (e.g. memory usage),
- invoking arbitrary commands, e.g. to continue improving code to be used in a subsequent
  cell, while having live access to the previously defined variables.

Subshells are supported by `ipykernel` 7 (currently in alpha).

To create a subshell, open context menu (right-click)
over a notebook using a kernel supporting subshells
and select "New Subshell Console for Notebook".
A new console panel will open allowing access to variables from the main session.

To enable the use of subshell by widgets (such as `ipywidgets`)

> change the Kernel Comms over subshells setting.

Author: TBC, pending https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyterlab/pull/17363

Reviewer: Should we keep it here, or wait until #17363 is merged to add it back later in a separate PR?

Author: Let's drop it and add back in #17363 itself.

```suggestion
```

# JupyterLab Changelog

## v4.4

JupyterLab 4.4 includes a number of new features (described below), bug fixes, and enhancements.
This release is compatible with extensions supporting JupyterLab 4.0.

> Extension authors are recommended to consult the [Extension Migration Guide](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/latest/extension/extension_migration.html#jupyterlab-4-3-to-4-4) which lists deprecations and changes to the public API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extension authors are encouraged to consult the [Extension Migration Guide](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/latest/extension/extension_migration.html#jupyterlab-4-3-to-4-4) which lists deprecations and changes to the public API.
```

### Code console improvements

> The code console prompt can now be positioned on top, left, or right side of the console,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code console prompt can now be positioned on the top, left, or right side of the console,
```

in addition to the default bottom placement. The placement is persisted in the Prompt Cell
Position setting.

> The console toolbar now includes buttons to:
> - execute code,
> - restart the kernel,
> - clear the cells,
> - switch the kernel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The console toolbar now includes buttons to:
- Execute code
- Restart the kernel
- Clear the cells
- Switch the kernel
```

> Additional settings for console behavior were added:
> - Clear Code Content on Execute (enabled by default) - when disabled,
>   the code submitted for execution remains in the code editor, allowing for further edits
> - Hide Code Input - when enabled shows only the output of the execution in the console
> - Clear Cells on Execute - when enabled shows only last cell

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional settings for console behavior have been added:
- Clear Code Content on Execute (enabled by default) – When disabled, the code submitted for execution remains in the code editor, allowing for further edits.
- Hide Code Input – When enabled, only the execution output is shown in the console.
- Clear Cells on Execute – When enabled, only the last cell is displayed.
```

> Toggling all the three new settings transforms the console into an interactive editor

Reviewer: Maybe we could add a screenshot to better what it looks like when all the options are enabled?

For example this one from the related PR? https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyterlab/pull/13837

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/41e2a4f2-90d2-45bc-86ee-30244025be69)

Reviewer: Although it had the dev-mode red border at the top that could be removed.

> Toggling all the three new settings transforms the console into an interactive editor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enabling all three of these new settings transforms the console into an interactive editor
```

Author: "Clear Code Content on Execute" is enabled by default and needs to be disabled, right? Hence "toggling"

Reviewer: Ah right,, leaving as is then!

resembling an ephemeral notebook with a single cell.

<img alt="The option to change console prompt position is available under the three dots button in the console toolbar, which is the last toolbar button" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/krassowski/jupyterlab/user-facing-changelog-4.4/docs/source/getting_started/changelog_assets/4.4-console.png" class="jp-screenshot">

### Settings import and export

> Settings can now be exported to `overrides.json` from the Settings Editor,
> which can be used to pre-configure defaults on deployments or for restoring
> the settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Settings can now be exported to `overrides.json` from the Settings Editor,
which can be used to pre-configure defaults in deployments or to restore settings.
```

<img alt="The Import and Export buttons in the Settings Editor are the first two items in the toolbar panel" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/krassowski/jupyterlab/user-facing-changelog-4.4/docs/source/getting_started/changelog_assets/4.4-settings-import-export.png" class="jp-screenshot">

### Workspace indicator

> An opt-in workspace indicator displayed on the top bar (next to the menu bar) can be enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An opt-in workspace indicator displayed on the top bar (next to the menu bar). It can be enabled
```

Author: The first part sounds odd then.

in the Settings → View → Appearance → Show Workspace Indicator.

<img alt="The workspace indicator in the open state" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/krassowski/jupyterlab/user-facing-changelog-4.4/docs/source/getting_started/changelog_assets/4.4-workspace-indicator.png" class="jp-screenshot">

### Support for collaboration without `RTC:` drive

Real time collaboration in previous versions of JupyterLab
(which can be enabled by installing jupyter-collaboration package)
was implemented by swapping the default JupyterLab file system
drive to a collaborative drive with the `RTC:` prefix.

> This was not compatible with multiple extensions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach was incompatible with multiple extensions.
```

> JupyterLab 4.4 introduces Content Providers API which will
> enable the next version of `jupyter-collaboration` to work
> without changing the drive prefix, and thus improves
> compatibility with extensions which do not support arbitrary drives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JupyterLab 4.4 introduces the Content Providers API, which allows the next version of `jupyter-collaboration` to work without changing the drive prefix.
This improves compatibility with extensions that do not support arbitrary drives.
```

### Kernel subshells support

Kernel subshells, introduced in [JEP 91](https://jupyter.org/enhancement-proposals/91-kernel-subshells/kernel-subshells.html),

> enable concurrent code execution, in kernels which support them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
enable concurrent code execution in kernels that support them.
```

> When performing a long-running computation (such as training of a model), subshells enable:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When performing long-running computations (such as training a model), subshells allow users to:
```

Author: Took everything except for enable → allow change to follow the docs writing guide.

> - using `ipywidgets` with updates displayed immediately,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use `ipywidgets` with updates displayed immediately
```

> - monitoring the kernel resource usage (e.g. memory usage),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Monitor kernel resource usage (e.g. memory usage)
```

> - invoking arbitrary commands, e.g. to continue improving code to be used in a subsequent
>   cell, while having live access to the previously defined variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Invoke arbitrary commands (e.g., refine code for a subsequent cell) while maintaining live access to previously defined variables
```

Subshells are supported by `ipykernel` 7 (currently in alpha).

To create a subshell, open context menu (right-click)
over a notebook using a kernel supporting subshells
and select "New Subshell Console for Notebook".
A new console panel will open allowing access to variables from the main session.

<img alt="The subshell console" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/krassowski/jupyterlab/user-facing-changelog-4.4/docs/source/getting_started/changelog_assets/4.4-subshells.png" class="jp-screenshot">

### Context menu opt-out

The context menu, available under right mouse click in browsers, can now be disabled globally
by toggling the `Enable Context Menu` option available in the Command Palette,

> or via JSON Settings Editor in the Application Context Menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or via the JSON Settings Editor in the Application Context Menu.
```

### Slimmer status bar

> The terminals counter no longer shows up on the status bar if no terminals are open.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The terminals counter no longer appears in the status bar if no terminals are open.
```
